No Tug of War Image by https://thenounproject.com/leremy/

This file is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International license.	

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/en:Creative_Commons
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en

You are free:

to share – to copy, distribute and transmit the work

to remix – to adapt the work

Under the following conditions:

attribution – You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were 
made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or 
your use.

share alike – If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute your contributions 
under the same or compatible license as the original.


## Summary of the GtY Approach

1) Separate the People from the Problem

2) Focus on Interests Rather than Positions

3) Generate a Variety of Options before Settling on an Agreement

4) Insist that the agreement be based on objective criteria

5) BATNA

Taking each of these steps in turn...

## Separate the People from the Problem

Sometimes it helps to imagine that the two or more parties involved are on the same side of a table, with 
the 'thing' they are working on laid out on the table in front of them. The imagery is designed to evoke an 
image of people working on a problem together.

Right away this provides a path for discussion. Have you agreed on the 'machine' you're working on 
together? Is it clear who will be the beneficiary of the work that's being done, that the machine will do? 
Or instead is the point of your agreement to enable team building? What fraction of your group resources 
are being spent on various needs? What does a successful partnership look like, in terms of its outputs?

Can you provide answers to these problems that enable you, as a negotiating pair, to focus on the important 
things that have nothing to do with your individual personalities? Is there a clear divide between the 
people involved (their egos) and the product of the agreement?

Once you are able to separate the problem from the people involved, egos are less likely to be engaged. 
Feelings are less likely to be hurt. People will be more able to focus on the abstract and practical merits 
of any given circumstance.

## Focus on Interests Rather than Positions

If your negotiation is a game of tug of war, people will gain and release positions they are defending. 
This hurts relationships and affects people's feelings of power in a negative way. In any given 
negotiation, it helps it both parties have decided the extent to which an on-going relationship matters.

Compare these statements:

John: "I think we should spend 3 hours per day sharing ideas."

Sally: "I think we should spend 1 hour per day sharing ideas."

Pat: "I think we should figure out how to decide, on any given day, whether idea sharing is still vital for 
that day, or for the overall plan."

Planning to split the difference between John and Sally would leave them both unsatisfied, and ignore the 
underlying needs surrounding idea sharing. Pat's statement focuses on the underlying interest.


## Generate a Variety of Options before Settling on an Agreement

Let's say John presents an idea, and he's especially attached to it because, having come up with it, it 
fits his thinking. Then Sally comes up with a different solution, and is equally attached to that as an 
outcome. Pat may hear components of each idea that work, but if people are choosing between a limited 
number of options, there's a higher risk of attachement and less opportunity for creative thinking that 
will find win-win situations that a) appeal to everyone involved and b) may result in better outcomes for 
all involved.

## Insist that the agreement be based on objective criteria

Consider whether your issue can in fact by viewed through a mutually agreed upon lense of best practices. 
If you can find agreement on that, then you're more likely to find win-win situations. The principle itself 
carries a lot of weight in that it appeals to the sense of fairness for each individual. Anyone wanting to 
do things differently than a norm is going to have to defend why and that won't always work well. They'll 
have a hard time making proposals that are clearly self serving.

## Be aware of your "BATNA", and use that as part of your negotiating strategy.

BATNA = Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement. This sets how much work you should do to find creative 
win-wins. It tells you when it's better to walk away. You'll be able to explain why you're walking away 
from any given potential agreement openly. It can prevent you from working too hard just to maintain a 
relationship that ends in resentment.



### Is Ego good or bad?

Does it help to remind yourself and others of your own worth? Of their worth? Does the current issue 
reflect and have impact on the current situation?

Group work is an N-Squared Situation.

Language Matters.

Language and it's effect are lightning fast and often the result of unconscious habit.

PassActive.

Blame vs. Credit

The Hero Model vs. The Teamwork Model

Look for the moment when you're ego gets engaged, and then challenge yourself to consciously decide how 
your future ego will be fed. Will I be proud of the decisions and actions I took? Will others recognize my 
contribution and does that really matter?

Self-soothing As A Skill

De-escalation As A Skill

Aspire to be the Right Person at the Right Time with the Right Skills

What's Fair is often Subjective, Open to Interpretation and fodder for negotiation.

Negotiation is an opportunity to communicate about the merits and details of the path and outcomes, but it 
is also an opportunity to talk about the meta-, the how we will work together, the 
language/vocabulary/pace/environment we will choose, etc.

The text digital interface leaves places for assumptions, and errant narrative building.

Appealing to a Third Party: Neutral Mediators vs. Cavalry and Reinforcements

What about problematic personalities? You WILL end up doing a lot of the work.

What are the tensions we work through and what is the goal?

Lower friction for future efforts <-> land in a fair place that benefits team members and beneficiaries

to build skills <-> to make efficient use of time

Sometimes doing the hard work of searching for Win-Win falls to a single individual. Identifying the 
underlying legitimate interests can be hard work.


## The Cycle For Student Groups

1. Take this Session
2. Do your projects. See any red flags? Bring it up in 1:1 with instructors or mentors.
3. When your project is done, give us feedback on how the principles worked, and give us ways to improve 
this Breakout.

